So in the last lecture, we added color,
now it would be nice if we could select a single data point, a single bar and update other charts in our
report based on that selection.
It's relatively simple to do that, as before, I will start in my interface because for each bar chart data point,
so each bar, I want to determine whether it has been selected or not.
So I will add a selection ID property here and this will be of type ISelectionID, an interface provided
by Power BI by the Power BI
visual developer tools because of course it's a common case that we want to be able to select individual
parts or data points in general. So now with that added to the interface, we have to do something here
where we transform our data.
We conveniently get the error already
and that of course makes sense because we need to add this newly added selectionID property to the
object we're pushing on our array of data points.
Now this property can be initialized using the host again, the hosting element and there we can call the
creation selectionID builder because internally in Power BI, we want to assign ID to each data point
and create selectionID builder gives us a tool which allows us to do just that. So Power BI will handle
the heavy lifting behind the scenes,
we now only need to configure it a bit.
We do this by calling another method on that, withCategory, where we store a category and we tell it,
well on which element are we right now. Keep in mind, here we are in the array where we set up all
the data points,
so we have this I index which changes during each iteration,
so with that we can set up this ID binding.
Finally, we call createSelectionID to finish this process
and now each element will have its own selection ID stored internally by Power BI once this code runs.
So that's useful for setting this up when we get data,
now of course we also want to use the selection ID and kind of use it when we click on a bar,
we haven't added such a functionality yet. The first place where I need to change something is in the
constructor or to be precise, I want to create a new property.
This new property will be named selectionManager and it should be a private one as all the others
too
and it will be of type ISselectionManager, a tool Power BI gives us to, well manage the selections
behind the scenes. Here when we construct everything, I want to assign this or give it a value and I
can give this value from the options we're receiving, from the host element and there, we have this create
selection manager method which I'll call. Now Power BI is able to manage the selected items, still we need
to listen to the event and we do it down here in the update method where we did create our bars and
did configure them. After configuring them but before calling exit remove, I'll add barsOn to listen to
an event and on takes as a first argument the event I want to listen to,
that's the click event in our case so that when we click on a bar, something happens.
Next, I'll execute a function where I will receive the data point I clicked on, so the individual bar
you could say and this function here, in there,
here I will use the selection manager.
Now since this is in a click event and the this keyword sometimes behaves differently that you would think
in Javascript, I can store the selection manager in a separate variable, accessing this.selectionManager
from the class and now inside of this anonymous function where this would refer to something else since
this is executed when the event occurs,
I can now use the selection manager to call select because now, I want to select this item we clicked
on and with select
I mean tell Power BI that we clicked on it.
So with select here, I need to pass information about my data point, to be precise,
I need to pass the selection ID which we configured a while ago, at the beginning when we transformed
our data.
Now select returns a promise,
so here we can chain then to do something once this has been done by Power BI.
So once Power BI knows that we selected this, what do we want to do next? Here I want to execute
an anonymous function where I get all IDs,
so my selection ID type and now an array of these IDs
and that is an arrow function here and in here, I now want to change my bars attributes. I want to change
something here and here I want to add the fill opacity property or attribute which will define how opaque
a single bar is
and of course all bars which are not selected should get a little bit transparent and only the bar
which was selected should be fully opaque.
So therefore here, I will define the following code,
I will check if in my IDs I have here,
if the length is greater than zero which means we do have some bars selected, at least one,
otherwise we have zero selected IDs.
So if we do have a selected ID, then I want to set the opacity here to .5 so that adds 50%
transparent,
otherwise I'll send it to 1 which means it's fully opaque.
Now all bars are a little bit transparent
if we do have a selected bar, therefore I then need to use d3 and the select method to select this item
and since I'm here inside this anonymous function I passed on this click listener, this refers to the
element we clicked on,
that's also the reason why I used a normal function here and no arrow function because with arrow functions,
this keeps its original context, here
I want to change the context, the thing this refers to, this
now is the element we clicked on.
So I now selected this element and for the selected the element of course, I want to override this fill
opacity, here
I don't want to have this transparent opacity was set up in the first attribute statement, here instead
I want to set fill opacity to one because this is the one we clicked on,
this should be fully opaque, fully visible. Well and that should be all,
with that we should be able to select it, we should be able to tell Power BI that we selected something
and we should be able to change the appearance.
If we now save this file and we still have it running in the command prompt, if we go back to our project
and reload this visual, if I click this bar, you see it updates in the donut here too
and you see the opacity also changes appropriately.
So this is now working,
we're now able to select data in our own chart as well as in others.